documentation.txt

Andy Tran, Fanney Zhu
andytran@college.harvard.edu, fanneyzhu@college.harvard.edu

CS50 Final Project
Leap Motion Piano (Virtual Steinway) Program User Documentation 
Application is in Folder: PlayPiano

In essence, we have created a virtual piano that can be interacted via a Leap Motion 
sensor. The piano has three octaves and once the program is opened, you have the control 
of a piano on any computer with literally your fingertips. 

The program is interfaced with a Leap Motion Controller, which functions as your motion 
sensor that detects your hands’ movements. The Leap Motion controller is a small USB 
connected peripheral device that can be placed on any flat surface or table top pointing 
upwards. The Leap motion controller is able to detect your motion by having two 
monochromatic infrared cameras and three LEDs that face up to observe a hemisphere volume 
approximately 1 meter radius from the motion sensor’s point of origin. So as long as your 
hands are within the 1 meter radius of the detection hemisphere of the Leap motion sensor, 
your hand would be able to be tracked by the sensor.

To use the program, you would first have to obtain a Leap Motion Sensor, which can be 
purchased from the store website at http://store-us.leapmotion.com/. Once obtained, the 
software package needed to install the drivers and software to run the device can be 
downloaded at https://www.leapmotion.com/setup, and version 2 (Leap v2) is available for 
Mac and Windows. If desiring to develop new applications and software with the Leap Motion 
device, one can download the Software Development Kit (SDK) that contains the necessary 
packages and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that are needed for code (we will 
talk about the specific APIs and functions that are used in the design.txt file). Once the 
software/drivers are installed to use the device, one should be able to plug in the Leap 
Motion sensor in a USB port and be good to go!

Once your Leap Motion Sensor is set-up and placed on a clean flat surface (or uncluttered 
desk), our program is already compiled and ready to run via doubling-clicking the 
Application file for Mac users or .exe executable file for Windows users. Once the program 
is open, you should see a Virtual Steinway & Sons Grand Piano with three octaves. Simply 
place your hands roughly six inches to a feet above the Leap Motion Controller and you 
should be able see your hand appear on screen. Once your hands appear on the screen, what 
you do should be pretty self-explanatory. Simply press your fingers down on the key with 
as much force as you would naturally use on a piano (if you press down too slowly, i.e, 
without enough force the key will not go down).

To summarize briefly, since we have precompiled our code into Application and executable 
files for Mac and Windows respectively, to use our virtual piano program, all you need is 
to set up the leap motion sensor and then simply double-click the file to run. To play, 
simply place your hands at a comfortable distance above the piano and press down the keys 
as you would naturally to play!
